1. HLA. 2023 Dec 6. doi: 10.1111/tan.15318. Online ahead of print.

Genomic full-length sequence of the novel HLA-DQB1*04:01:01:04 allele.

Yang JJ(1), Oh HB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Korea University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

The sequence of HLA-DQB1*04:01:01:04 differs from HLA-DQB1*04:01:01:03 by four 
nucleotide deletion in intron 2.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.15318
PMID: 38056499


2. HLA. 2023 Dec 1. doi: 10.1111/tan.15315. Online ahead of print.

Three novel variants of HLA-DQB1*06 identified by next-generation sequencing.

Marin Rubio LA(1), Ontañon J(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Unit, Clinical Analysis Department, Albacete University Hospital 
Complex, Albacete, Spain.

Characterization of HLA-DQB1*06:472, -DQB1*06:02:01:34 and -DQB1*06:04:01:06 
alleles in Spanish individuals.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.15315
PMID: 38037899


3. Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 3;14:1272021. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1272021. 
eCollection 2023.

High maternal-fetal HLA eplet compatibility is associated with severe 
manifestation of preeclampsia.

Stefańska K(#)(1), Kurkowiak M(#)(2), Piekarska K(3)(4)(5), Chruściel E(2), 
Zamkowska D(1), Jassem-Bobowicz J(6), Adamski P(1), Świątkowska-Stodulska R(7), 
Abacjew-Chmyłko A(1), Leszczyńska K(1), Zieliński M(4), Preis K(1), Zielińska 
H(3)(4), Tymoniuk B(8), Trzonkowski P(4), Marek-Trzonkowska NM(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk, 
Poland.
(2)International Centre for Cancer Vaccine Science (ICCVS), University of 
Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Immunology and Clinical Transplantology, University Clinical 
Centre in Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(4)Department of Medical Immunology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk, 
Poland.
(5)Laboratory of Immunoregulation and Cellular Therapies, Department of Family 
Medicine, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(6)Department of Neonatology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(7)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of 
Gdansk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(8)Department of Immunology and Allergy, Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, 
Poland.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia is responsible for more than 70 000 and 500 000 
maternal and fetal deaths, respectively each year. Incomplete remodelling of the 
spiral arteries in placenta is the most accepted theory of preeclampsia 
pathogenesis. However, the process is complexed with immunological background, 
as pregnancy resembles allograft transplantation. Fetus expresses human 
leukocyte antigens (HLA) inherited from both parents, thus is semiallogeneic to 
the maternal immune system. Therefore, induction of fetal tolerance is crucial 
for physiological outcome of pregnancy. Noteworthy, the immunogenicity of 
discordant HLA antigens is determined by functional epitopes called eplets, 
which are continuous and discontinuous short sequences of amino acids. This way 
various HLA molecules may express the same eplet and some HLA incompatibilities 
can be more immunogenic due to different eplet combination. Therefore, we 
hypothesized that maternal- fetal HLA incompatibility may be involved in the 
pathogenesis of gestational hypertension and its progression to preeclampsia. We 
also aimed to test if particular maternal-fetal eplet mismatches are more prone 
for induction of anti- fetal HLA antibodies in gestational hypertension and 
preeclampsia.
METHODS: High resolution next-generation sequencing of HLA-A, -B, -C, -DQB1 and 
-DRB1 antigens was performed in mothers and children from physiological 
pregnancies (12 pairs) and from pregnancies complicated with gestational 
hypertension (22 pairs) and preeclampsia (27 pairs). In the next step HLA eplet 
identification and analysis of HLA eplet incompatibilities was performed with in 
silico approach HLAMatchmaker algorithm. Simultaneously maternal sera were 
screened for anti-fetal HLA class I, class II and anti-MICA antibodies with 
Luminex, and data were analyzed with HLA-Fusion software.
RESULTS: We observed that high HLA-C, -B, and DQB1 maternal-fetal eplet 
compatibility was associated with severe preeclampsia (PE) manifestation. Both 
quantity and quality of HLA epletmismatches affected the severity of PE. 
Mismatches in HLA-B eplets: 65QIA+76ESN, 70IAO, 180E, HLA-C eplets: 193PL3, 
267QE, and HLA-DRB1 eplet: 16Y were associated with a mild outcome of 
preeclampsia if the complication occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: High HLA-C, HLA-DQB1 and HLA-B eplet compatibility between mother 
and child is associated with severe manifestation of preeclampsia. Both quantity 
and quality of maternal-fetal HLA eplet mismatches affects severity of 
preeclampsia.

Copyright © 2023 Stefańska, Kurkowiak, Piekarska, Chruściel, Zamkowska, 
Jassem-Bobowicz, Adamski, Świątkowska-Stodulska, Abacjew-Chmyłko, Leszczyńska, 
Zieliński, Preis, Zielińska, Tymoniuk, Trzonkowski and Marek-Trzonkowska.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1272021
PMCID: PMC10655094
PMID: 38022600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision


4. Medicina (Kaunas). 2023 Nov 4;59(11):1950. doi: 10.3390/medicina59111950.

Role of Human Leukocyte Antigen Class II in Antibody-Mediated Skin Disorders.

Sernicola A(1), Mazzetto R(1), Tartaglia J(1), Ciolfi C(1), Miceli P(1), Alaibac 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit, Department of Medicine (DIMED), University of Padua, 35121 
Padova, Italy.

HLA class II molecules are key factors determining susceptibility to autoimmune 
disorders, and their role in immune-mediated skin conditions such as psoriasis 
has been extensively investigated. However, there is currently little 
understanding of their role in antibody-mediated skin diseases such as 
autoimmune blistering disorders. We researched the available literature using 
PubMed to narratively review the current knowledge on HLA associations in 
antibody-mediated blistering skin pathologies. Our results summarized the risk 
alleles that are identified in the literature, together with certain known 
protective alleles: in the pemphigus group, alleles HLA-DQB1*0503 and 
HLA-DRB1*0402 are most commonly associated with disease; in the pemphigoid 
group, the most studied allele is HLA-DQB1*0301; in epidermolysis bullosa 
acquisita, few genetic studies are available; in dermatitis herpetiformis, the 
association with haplotypes HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8 is strongly established; 
finally, in linear IgA bullous disease, specific HLA alleles may be responsible 
for pediatric presentations. Our current pathogenic understanding of this group 
of disorders assigns a key role to predisposing HLA class II alleles that are 
able to bind disease autoantigens and therefore stimulate antigen-specific 
autoreactive T cells. The latter engage B lymphocytes that will produce 
pathogenic autoantibodies. The distribution of HLA alleles and their disease 
associations are variable across demographics, and an in-depth pathogenetic 
understanding is needed to support associations between HLA alleles and disease 
phenotypes. Additionally, in a personalized medicine approach, the 
identification of HLA alleles associated with the risk of disease may become 
clinically relevant in identifying susceptible subjects that should avoid 
exposure to known triggers, such as medication, when possible.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina59111950
PMCID: PMC10673328
PMID: 38003999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


5. Genes (Basel). 2023 Oct 27;14(11):2010. doi: 10.3390/genes14112010.

Genome-Wide Association Analysis across Endophenotypes in Alzheimer's Disease: 
Main Effects and Disease Stage-Specific Interactions.

Rosewood TJ(1)(2)(3), Nho K(1)(3)(4), Risacher SL(1)(3), Gao S(1)(5), Shen L(6), 
Foroud T(1)(2), Saykin AJ(1)(2)(3), On Behalf Of The Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(2)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(4)School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN 
46202, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, The Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The underlying genetic susceptibility for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is not yet 
fully understood. The heterogeneous nature of the disease challenges genetic 
association studies. Endophenotype approaches can help to address this challenge 
by more direct interrogation of biological traits related to the disease. AD 
endophenotypes based on amyloid-β, tau, and neurodegeneration (A/T/N) biomarkers 
and cognitive performance were selected from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort (N = 1565). A genome-wide association 
study (GWAS) of quantitative phenotypes was performed using an SNP main effect 
and an SNP by Diagnosis interaction (SNP × DX) model to identify disease 
stage-specific genetic effects. Nine loci were identified as study-wide 
significant with one or more A/T/N endophenotypes in the main effect model, as 
well as additional findings significantly associated with cognitive measures. 
These nine loci include SNPs in or near the genes APOE, SRSF10, HLA-DQB1, XKR3, 
and KIAA1671. The SNP × DX model identified three study-wide significant genetic 
loci (BACH2, EP300, and PACRG-AS1) with a neuroprotective effect in later AD 
stage endophenotypes. An endophenotype approach identified novel genetic 
associations and provided insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
genetic associations that may otherwise be missed using conventional 
case-control study designs.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14112010
PMCID: PMC10671827
PMID: 38002954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Andrew Saykin receives support from multiple NIH 
grants (P30 AG010133, P30 AG072976, R01 AG019771, R01 AG057739, U19 AG024904, 
R01 LM013463, R01 AG068193, T32 AG071444, U01 AG068057, U01 AG072177, and U19 
AG074879). He has also received support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, a 
subsidiary of Eli Lilly (in kind contribution of PET tracer precursor); Bayer 
Oncology (Scientific Advisory Board); Eisai (Scientific Advisory Board); Siemens 
Medical Solutions USA, Inc. (Dementia Advisory Board); NIH NHLBI (MESA 
Observational Study Monitoring Board); Springer-Nature Publishing (Editorial 
Office Support as Editor-in-Chief, Brain Imaging and Behavior). Li Shen has 
received additional funding paid to the University of Pennsylvania from NSF IIS 
1622526/1827472, NSF IIS 1837964, NIH RF1 AG063481, NIH R01 LM013463, NIH U01 
AG068057, NIH R01 AG058854, NIH RF1 AG068191, NIH R01 AG071470, NIH R01 
EB022574. Li Shen has served as consultant on NIH grant R24 EB029173 from the 
University of Massachusetts. Tatiana Foroud acts as a consultant for NIH-funded 
centers and other infrastructure grants and receives funding for travel expenses 
from the Michael J. Fox Foundation and from academic institutions on which she 
serves as advisor. Sujuan Gao has served as an unpaid board and committee member 
on the data safety monitoring board for R01 AG058586, 18G-MC-LMDC, R01 HL151951, 
and paid data safety monitoring board member for R01 AG061898. Shannon Risacher 
served as Communications Chair, unpaid, for the Alzheimer’s Association AWARE 
PIA, as well as received travel funding for the Charleston Conference on 
Alzheimer’s Disease. She also has equity interest in Eli Lilly (<$10000), a 
company that may potentially benefit in the research results of this study. Thea 
Rosewood and Kwangsik Nho have no interests to declare. The funders had no role 
in the design of this study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of 
data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the 
results.


6. Immunogenetics. 2023 Nov 18. doi: 10.1007/s00251-023-01325-5. Online ahead of 
print.

Investigating associations between HLA DQA1 ~ DQB1 haplotypes, H. pylori 
infection, metaplasia, and anti-CagA IgA seropositivity in a Turkish gastritis 
cohort.

Colakogullari M(1), Karatas L(2), Tatar Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Izmir Democracy University, Izmir, Turkey. 
mukaddes.colakogullari@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Izmir Democracy University, Izmir, Turkey.

Helicobacter pylori was reported as an important cause of gastritis, and gastric 
ulcers and CagA oncoprotein-producing H. pylori subgroups were blamed to 
increase the severity of gastritis. Disparities were reported in that the 
presence of serum anti-CagA IgA was not parallel with CagA-positive H. pylori 
cohabitation. We hypothesized that the HLA-DQA1 ~ DQB1 haplotypes in human 
populations include protective haplotypes that more effectively present 
immunogenic CagA peptides and susceptible haplotypes with an impaired capacity 
to present CagA peptides. We recruited patients (n = 201) admitted for 
gastroendoscopy procedures and performed high-resolution HLA-DQA1 and DQB1 
typing. Serum anti-CagA IgA levels were analyzed by ELISA (23.0% positive), and 
H. pylori was classified as positive or negative in gastric mucosal tissue 
slides (72.6% positive). The HLA DQA1*05:05 allele (29.1%) and HLA DQB1*03:01 
allele (32.8%) were found at the highest frequency among gastritis patients of 
Turkish descent. In HLA DQA1*05:05 ~ DQB1*03:01 double homozygous (7.3%) and 
heterozygous (40.7%) haplotype carriers, the presence of anti-CagA IgA decreased 
dramatically, the presence of H. pylori increased, and the presence of 
metaplasia followed a decreasing trend. The DQ protein encoded by HLA 
DQA1*05:05-DQ*03:01 showed a low binding affinity to the CagA peptide when 
binding capacity was analyzed by the NetMHCIIPan 4.0 prediction method. In 
conclusion, HLA DQA1 ~ DQB1 polymorphisms are crucial as host defense mechanisms 
against CagA H. pylori since antigen binding capacity plays a crucial role in 
anti-CagA IgA production.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-023-01325-5
PMID: 37979046


7. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 31;24(21):15803. doi: 10.3390/ijms242115803.

HLA-DQB1*06 and Select Neighboring HLA Variants Predict Chlamydia Reinfection 
Risk.

Gupta K(1), Wiener HW(2), Tiwari HK(3), Geisler WM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL 35294, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL 35294, USA.

Associations of HLA class II alleles with genital chlamydial infection outcomes 
have been reported, especially HLA DQB1*06. However, the potential role of 
DQB1*06 in influencing reinfection risk has still not been established. The 
purpose of this study was to determine whether the association of DQB1*06 with 
chlamydia reinfection was impacted by any other nearby HLA class II variants 
that were also associated with reinfection. We used next-generation sequencing 
to map HLA class II variants spanning the HLA-DQ and -DR loci. DQB1*06 as well 
as DQB1*04 were confirmed as significant predictors of chlamydia reinfection, 
when controlling for age and percent African ancestry. SKAT analysis revealed 
one region each in DRB1, DRB5, DQA2, and three intergenic regions that had 
variants associated with reinfection. Further analyses of these variants 
revealed that rs112651494 within DRB5 and an intergenic SNP rs617058 in 
DRB1:DQA1 were significantly associated with reinfection, but this did not 
impact the significance of the association of DQB1*06 or DQB1*04 with 
reinfection.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242115803
PMCID: PMC10647357
PMID: 37958786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


8. Acta Orthop Belg. 2023 Sep;89(3):373-380. doi: 10.52628/89.2.10491.

A potential prognostic prediction model for metastatic osteosarcoma based on 
bioinformatics analysis.

Wang Y, Ming G, Gao B.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is a malignant primary bone tumor with a high incidence. This 
study aims to construct a prognostic prediction model by screening the 
prognostic mRNA of metastatic OS. Data on four eligible expression profiles from 
the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus 
repository were obtained based on inclusion criteria and defined as the training 
set or the validation set. The differentially expressed genres (DEGs) between 
meta- static and non-metastatic OS samples in the training set were first 
identified, and DEGs related to prognosis were screened by univariate Cox 
regression analysis. In total, 107 DEGs related to the prognosis of metastatic 
OS were identified. Then, 46 DEGs were isolated as the optimized prognostic gene 
signature, and a metastatic-OS discriminating classifier was constructed, which 
had a high accuracy in distinguishing metastatic from non-metastatic OS samples. 
Furthermore, four optimized prognostic gene signatures (ALOX5AP, COL21A1, 
HLA-DQB1, and LDHB) were further screened, and the prognostic prediction model 
for metastatic OS was constructed. This model possesses a relatively satisfying 
prediction ability both in the training set and validation set. The prognostic 
prediction model that was constructed based on the four prognostic mRNA 
signatures has a high predictive ability for the prognosis of metastatic OS.

DOI: 10.52628/89.2.10491
PMID: 37935218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Diabetes. 2023 Nov 7:db230387. doi: 10.2337/db23-0387. Online ahead of print.

Increased Frequency of the HLA-DRB1*04:04-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02 Haplotype among 
HLA-DQB1*06:02 Positive Children with Type 1 Diabetes.

Ilonen J(1), Kiviniemi M(1), El-Amir MI(1)(2), Nygård L(3), Härkönen T(4), 
Lempainen J(1)(5)(6), Knip M(4)(7); Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register.

Author information:
(1)Immunogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 
Turku, Finland.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, South 
Valley University, Qena, Egypt.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(4)Research Program for Clinical and Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Departments of Pediatrics, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, 
Turku, Finland.
(6)Clinical Microbiology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(7)Pediatric Research Center, Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

HLA DR-DQ haplotypes largely define genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes 
(T1D). The DQB1*06:02 positive haplotype (DR15-DQ602) common in subjects of 
European ancestry is very rare among children with T1D. Among 4490 children with 
T1D in the Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register 57 (1.3%) cases with DQB1*06:02 
were identified in comparison to 26.1% of affected family-based association 
controls. There was no difference between DQB1*06:02 positive and negative 
children with T1D regarding sex, age, islet autoantibody distribution or 
autoantibody levels, but significant differences were seen in the frequency of 
the second class II HLA haplotypes. The most prevalent haplotype present with 
DQB1*06:02 was DRB1*04:04-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02 which was found in 27 of 57 (47.4%) 
children compared to only 797/4433 (18.0%) among DQB1*06:02 negative cases 
(P<0.001, Chi-square test). The other common risk associated haplotypes, the 
DRB1*04:01-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02 and (DR3)-DQA1*05-DQB1*02 were less prevalent in 
DQB1*06:02 positive than DQB1*06:02 negative children (P<0.001). HLA-B allele 
frequencies did not differ between DQB1*06:02 haplotypes in children with T1D 
and controls and neither in DRB1*04:04-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02 haplotypes of 
DQB1*06:02 positive and negative T1D children. The increased frequency of 
DRB1*04:04 allele among DQB1*06:02 positive cases may indicate preferential 
ability of the DR404 molecule to present islet antigen epitopes despite of the 
competition by DQ602.

© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/db23-0387
PMID: 37934957


10. Sleep Med. 2023 Dec;112:234-238. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2023.10.028. Epub 2023
Oct  30.

Narcolepsy type 1 and Sydenham chorea - Report of 3 cases and review of the 
literature.

Wenz ES(1), Schinkelshoek MS(2), Kallweit U(3), Fronczek R(4), Rezaei R(3), 
Khatami R(5), Lammers GJ(4), Bassetti CLA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Graduate School of Health Sciences, University of Bern, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: elena.wenz@insel.ch.
(2)Neurology Department, Leiden University Medical Center, Heemstede, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Center for Narcolepsy and Hypersomnias, Clinical Sleep and Neuroimmunology, 
Institute of Immunology, University Witten/Herdecke, Germany.
(4)Neurology Department, Leiden University Medical Center, Heemstede, the 
Netherlands; Stichting Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland (SEIN), 
Sleep-Wakecenter, Heemstede, the Netherlands.
(5)Center for Sleep Medicine and Epileptology, Klinik Barmelweid AG, 
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES/BACKGROUND: Narcolepsy type 1 (NT1) is an immune-mediated disorder 
characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, low levels of 
hypocretin-1 in the cerebrospinal fluid, and a strong association with the HLA 
DQB1*06:02 allele. There is evidence for streptococcal infections as one 
pathogenic factor that may lead to NT1 as part of a multifactorial pathogenesis. 
Elevated titers of Antistreptolysin-O antibodies and increased inflammatory 
activity in response to streptococci antigens have been described in patients 
with NT1. Sydenham chorea (SC) results from a post-streptococcal autoimmune 
process targeting basal ganglia neurons. Despite this common trigger, SC has 
been interpreted as a misdiagnosis in a few described cases of patients who were 
first diagnosed with SC and later with NT1. Our goal was to analyze the 
association between SC and NT1.
PATIENTS/METHODS: We reviewed the literature and report three patients from 
three European sleep centers who were diagnosed with both SC and NT1 within a 
few months.
RESULTS: We describe the cases of one male (age 10) and two female (age 22 and 
10) patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We argue that in those cases both diagnoses are justified, unlike 
reports of previous cases in which SC was considered a misdiagnosis in patients 
with NT1. It remains, however, unclear if the conditions occur independently or 
if there is an overlap disorder- an SC-like subtype of narcolepsy with a 
particular sequence of symptoms. Further studies need to clarify the causality 
of the relationship and the pathophysiology of the reported rare association.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2023.10.028
PMID: 37925849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Elena S. Wenz reports a 
relationship with University of Bern that includes: funding grants. Ulf Kallweit 
reports a relationship with Bioprojet, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals that includes: consulting or advisory and speaking and lecture 
fees. Rolf Fronczek reports a relationship with Takeda Pharmaceuticals, 
Bioprojet that includes: consulting or advisory. Rolf Fronczek reports a 
relationship with Jazz Pharmaceuticals that includes: funding grants. Gert Jan 
Lammers reports a relationship with Bioprojet, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals, NLS Pharmaceutics that includes: consulting or advisory and 
speaking and lecture fees.
